If you don't mind, we're running.
Ben, Budsport.
How do you deal with people who suggest that you're doing a number on the claims?
Well, you know, it's a good question.
I, um... Right, which I thought was very unfair.
You know, I pondered this before it came out and really even before I embarked on the story, although, as you know, the circumstances changed as I was working on this.
And, you know, I keep coming back to what I think is a philosophy I've had that's been tested many times, and that is you can never predict what the impact of information will be.
And I just have to believe that the truth serves society's interests and that knowledge
serves everyone's interest, and how people react to that is out of my control.
But it's essential in a democracy that we have informed citizenry.
I think these are legitimate questions.
I've tried to answer them in a non-partisan way.
And really, it wasn't my fault.
You know, whether they're good for the Clintons or bad for the Clintons, that's up for readers to decide.
Well, of course, there is perception in it, especially when I...
And I don't mean to discuss somebody else's review, and I won't.
No, that's okay.
I don't mind.
But hers does come to mind, as she suggests, for instance, that you don't have any smoking crystals and nothing moves your report.
Well, you know, I'm being attacked from both sides of the political spectrum.
Of course, you have Tom Powers' review in the Sunday Times, which is... Certainly.
I can tell immediately from a review how someone feels about the plaintiffs.
And that's okay.
But the people who generally like the Clintons are saying, well, there's no smoking gun.
It's true there's no smoking gun.
The White House has said there's no smoking gun.
But to me, that's hardly the end of the discussion, in my view.
How many smoking guns are there in life outside of mystery novels?
There aren't that many.
Life is not made up of smoking guns.
And frankly, I think our political culture has reached a sorry point if all we want to talk about is, is there a smoking gun or not?
Could you turn the volume down on that just a little bit?
Chance to check it.
Okay, so I'm sorry, we're talking about smoking guns, I guess.
Right, so you know, so what?
My view is, well, you know, again, given that I was invited to undertake this project by the Clintons, who said they had nothing to hide, I didn't go into this looking for a smoking gun, and I didn't think it would be a good story because there was or wasn't a smoking gun.
That's to an interesting point.
point that the fact that you were invited by people, and then you had this long session with Hillary that you discussed, too.
Would the book have been dramatically different had the Clintons chosen to cooperate with you?
I think it would have been different, certainly.
I mean, I know that I, as a journalist, I mean, say, I'm going to do the story with you to help but without it.
Yeah, exactly.
Right.
You know, help me or hinder me, I plan to get it.
And I suspect that this was probably
That was my approach, and I told the Clintons that would be my approach, but I said, realistically, a work and the structure of a work is shaped inevitably by the information that you get.
And I said, I believe it would be in your interest to share as much information as you have with me as soon as possible.
Those are the sources in a story who end up having the most influence, not because you want to favor a source or something, but it's just a practical reality.
a story and the sort of outline of a book begins to take shape in your mind as you learn information.
And so that somebody who cooperates with you early has more of an influence.
He's somebody who waits until the manuscript is essentially written and then says, well, I'll respond to specific charges.
Or even after it comes out, which is even more appreciated.
Which is even more appreciated.
And I think what would have happened is you would have understood the Clintons better, I think.
Although, you know, again, the good thing is that it forced me to do a thorough reporting job.
I'd like to think I would have done that anyway.
But
Again, I know that when someone cooperates a great deal, you don't necessarily double-check everything they tell you, just out of practical time constraints.
I think I still would have found the basic material that I found, but it would have been in a different and broader context.
Let's say, obviously, you didn't find the smoking that, and then you find out very few smoking that exist in most stories.
But what would the smoking then be?
What would you like to have found?
Well, I wasn't looking to derail the Clintons or exonerate them.
I wasn't looking for it.
But I think what I did find, and this is why it was probably... Well, what remains, what in your view then remains to be discovered that would really be printed one way or the other?
Well, I outline a number of areas that I think still need to be resolved factually to go to questions of legal or illegal behavior.
I think some of the more...
Serious ones include what did Mrs. Clinton do in this Casagrande transaction that she first denied knowing anything about, but then the billing records surfaced showing extensive involvement on her part.
And I think probably the most serious issue in this whole story has been the question of honesty, in some cases in replying to questions under oath, but there's a long series of
as I put it in the book, that certain, you know, relatively small misstatements took root, and then the myths grew up around them, and then it had to be supported by sort of ever more preposterous explanations.
But I think it is a sort of, you know, not a very flattering trail of dishonesty.
But, you know, again, I think...
One of the reasons that it may have been impossible for them to be candid with me, once I got to a certain point, was that it would have required acknowledging that so many misstatements were made, public misstatements were made, and I think they're in a political situation where they can't do that.
I think a lot of people, myself and public, feel that as
political scandals go, this is not a tent, you know?
Yeah, I mean, Whitewater itself doesn't, you know... And when you look at this, we were talking about in 78, you know, I would have to believe that an overwhelming opinion is, you know, what is this?
What makes this story so...
Well, part of why it's such a big deal is illustrated in the book.
I mean, one of the reasons that I call it blood sport is that, to me, I was primarily interested in Whitewater, and this is from the beginning, but again, I didn't expect it to be a major scandal.
It turned out to be somewhat more troubling than I actually anticipated, but I saw Whitewater as a window into the political culture of our times.
So you see the participants on all sides of the issue.
It's not just about the Clintons.
It's about the media and how they deal with them.
It's about their opponents in Congress and elsewhere.
It's about conservative think tanks and the people that are produced by that and the influence they've had on the public debate.
So a lot of the reason that this has been perpetuated is through the adversaries of the Clintons.
That's why I call it the president and his adversaries.
The ammunition in this blood sport that rages on to this day
However, I believe it's falsehoods, falsehoods on both sides.
The Clintons have said things that are wrong, and certainly, as you see quite vividly illustrated in the book, their adversaries have said some preposterous things that are completely false.
There isn't any respect for the truth in the political culture, and I think that is, at the core,
why this is a blood sport.
Is it a 90s story or is it endemic to politics as we've always known?
Well, it's a 90s story because it's happening in the 90s.
And, you know, I guess I'm not a historian and I haven't done a lot of reporting in Washington.
I think the question is, is it any worse than it has been before?
I know I can't answer that question, but I do know that I think that it's one of the reasons that so many people in this country are so jaded and cynical.
They don't believe anything they hear from anyone in Washington.
And they're frustrated by that.
This isn't a partisan issue.
It is for maybe the 10% of the population that's liberal to the core, conservative to the core, but for the 80% in between, they're disgusted by this kind of behavior.
Of course, I go back.
I spent a year in Washington back in the 60s doing some research that made my master's at a fellowship of the Washington Buildings, and I spent a whole year following the Bobby Baker story, which up until that time was quintessential
political scandal, you know, and you talk about lies and deception, and there was LBJ and all of them, and of course, that was a big story up until Watergate, which then came out in the 70s.
We've always seemed to have had one, haven't we?
Then we had the Iran matter in the 80s, so every decade seems to have one.
You go back to the 50s, you have the Icuna coat thing, and you can't
Jimmy Carter didn't really have one.
He was only one term.
He had the peanut warehouse issue, which we quickly discussed, and the brother, but he didn't really have one.
Well, people are jaded, and they're prepared to believe the worst, which is why the conspiracy theorists have had such a field day with the Clintons and certainly with the death of Vincent Foster.
I think that we have seen in this period, the 60s were still the era of political figures as mythical heroes.
And the press collaborated in that.
I mean, they knew so much that they never reported.
That was a central element in my thesis.
The relationship was so symbiotic that the guys on the Hill depended so much on the press.
Everybody could see Bobby Baker.
They knew that the most he ever made was 19 grand, and he owned these two wonderful motels at thousands of dollars, lived vast, and where the hell was the money?
And people closed their eyes.
And closed their eyes, and all the press went out as his guests to a weekend, you know?
Never reported.
But there has been a democratization of the media, and it's partly because the media has proliferated, and it's not just, as this story makes clear, it's not just the so-called mainstream established outlets like the Washington Post and NBC News that are controlling perceptions out there.
There's all this alternative media that is spewing what people want to hear, whether the high priests and the gatekeepers of
information agree or not.
Society has changed dramatically in that sense.
And the political culture hasn't adapted to that.
I think, you know, the White House is still busy spinning the myths, creating the illusions, and the expectation that the electorate cannot handle the sort of unvarnished truth.
And yet the electorate is becoming sophisticated.
It absorbed the story of Bill Clinton's draft situation.
It swallowed Jennifer Flowers.
I think it probably would have been able to evaluate the unvarnished facts of Whitewater as well, but clearly the Clintons felt that that was a risk they couldn't take.
Well, that still remains to be seen whether or not they can, don't you think?
I suppose the end will be the results of the November election.
I can't help but notice that Clinton's popularity ratings are quite high right now.
They're high.
Even in the immediate aftermath of these very damaging revelations of the billing records and documents being discovered that contradict the official line, I think the First Lady's approval ratings are down.
Very interesting piece of it was in the New York Times Review Review.
You know, the election may well go on the wives.
Did you see that piece?
I didn't see that.
He's Elizabeth Dole, a very active wife, you know.
Right.
She's certainly been more politically involved than Hillary.
She had a couple of categories, but standing back here, and now Hillary is the issue on the other side.
It was on the Weekend Reviews.
Yeah, I'll have to go back and look at that.
I heard there was actually something about my book on the Weekend Review, which I didn't see.
There was, I think, actually.
But that's what you want, obviously.
I've learned that I enjoy the fact that people read it and come away with things to talk about and different conclusions and something worth arguing about.
My goal in writing is not to be didactic or to, like, you know, force people to my point of view.
I'm trying to arm people to make up their own minds, to get the facts out, and to put them out in as objective, fair-minded way as I possibly can.
So it doesn't surprise me that I'm being attacked from both the right and the left, and I think that's healthy.
No, that's wonderful.
I have a book out.
I have a chapter in there where I read about this book, Peter, who stole $20 million in books.
What I like is that I got a letter from the thief, from prison, telling me that it was fair analysis.
I got a letter from the judge telling me, I said, boy, if you can clean both sides, you've done a pretty good job.
If you can antagonize both sides, you've done a good job.
Either way, I guess is what you're saying.
Well, and not only am I being attacked from both sides, but I'm also getting some sort of surreptitious praise from both sides.
I've had a couple people in the White House,
close to the Clintons call me to say, look, we're not going to say another word about this, but we think you got it right.
And I've had a few people, you know, from the, you know, extreme right say, you know, well, you know, we never really believed those Vince Foster murder theories anyway.
Well, but, but they're there.
And anybody who's foolish enough to listen to these talk shows, I mean,
And, of course, you derive your title from Vince Foster, which is a wonderful title, by the way.
It would be beautiful if you coined it yourself.
But, you know, how does Foster figure into this?
Is he the shadow?
Or do you start to look with it?
Well, I think he's a pivotal character.
I mean, in a literary sense, I think he is a metaphor for the tragedy of what our political culture has become.
Now, it's an extreme example, obviously.
Most people do not end up taking their lives to get involved in this, but so many of them are damaged in one way or another, and there's a sad progression of one person after another being forced out or having their reputation tarnished.
You see these characters in the story.
I'm sorry, I lost my train of thought.
You talk about White House, do you remember the Walter Jenkins story, going back to LBJ?
That's a little before my time.
You shouldn't have been down in the YMCA, on the G Street Y, and he didn't go out and kill himself.
Right, right.
He laughed and they said that he was probably over here as close as... Oh, right, I know, but let me back to Foster.
But the point is to go out and kid yourself, and you say, and by the way, if it seems that we're not touching on the book, it's because I have the book.
That's fine.
I'm happy to touch on everything you want.
I'd much rather get some quotes, you know,
pull what I need out of the book itself.
But you point out that any idea that his suicide would precipitate this kind of stuff, you probably wouldn't have done it.
But also, as a correlate, do you think you know why Foster killed himself?
Was it because of why Foster?
What I do is...
And you must have some opinions on that.
Yeah, I do.
I tried in as much detail as I could to show the various things that were weighing on his mind in order to show how severely depressed he was.
And it was only in doing this work that I think I began to come to an understanding of this.
Now, I obviously couldn't have read his mind, but yes, I think Whitewater was one of a number of issues that were on his mind.
I think people have misconstrued that note that was discovered here.
as a quote-unquote suicide note.
But when you see it in context, he wrote this note at the urging of his wife in preparation for what he thought would be public hearings into his conduct in the White House.
So in the note, he mentions things like the Wall Street Journal editorials that no doubt upset him, the travel office situation, which was clearly weighing heavily on him, several other things, but all of them already public events, essentially.
In anticipation of these hearings, he didn't list what I think was really most troubling to him, which he couldn't confide in anyone, which included, I believe, his knowledge of Whitewater and where that was leading.
He'd been involved in how to figure out the final tax treatment of Whitewater just before he died.
His notebooks are filled with references to Whitewater.
He'd been, I think I report for the first time, over in Webster Hubbell's basement looking through these records that had been removed from the Rose Law from the month before he died.
He's the only one in the White House, other than perhaps Hillary Clinton herself, who knew the full scope of the Whitewater thing.
It was definitely on his mind.
It wasn't the only thing, though.
There was also, I think he knew about Webb Hubble's billing problems in the Rose Firm.
As I say in the book,
When it was proposed that Webster-Hubble become Assistant Attorney General and would have to have a confirmation hearing, Vince Foster was very upset.
He said, well, you know, we don't want to have those hearings, do we?
And Bernie Nussbaum says, well, is there something Webster-Hubble has to hide?
He said, oh, no, no, no.
But, you know, it suggests that he did know that looming problem, which ended up, of course, sending Webster-Hubble to jail.
There was a deteriorating relationship with Hillary Clinton.
She had been his great confidant in the Rose Firm.
This relationship started to sour almost immediately in the White House.
He couldn't turn to her to unburden himself because she was part of the problem.
And he was covering up her involvement in the travel office affair.
He'd already lied to an internal investigation about it.
And this, a person who said in his Arkansas commencement speech, integrity was the most important thing in a person's life.
His had been compromised.
And finally, there was a troubled state of his relationship with his wife, which, again, I illuminate in some detail in the book.
But I think the important thing was,
He couldn't talk to his wife.
He couldn't talk to anyone as all of these problems mounted and began to terrify him.
You know, what the Wall Street Journal said about him was nothing, essentially.
When you really look at what they said, I don't think it's those articles that caused him to panic.
But what did cause him to panic was to think, oh my God, the Wall Street Journal wrote this with such a minor impetus.
What will they do to me when they find out what really is going on?
I think that is something that terrified and, again, contributed to this severe depression.
So there's no doubt in your mind that he went out and killed himself?
No doubt whatsoever.
And while I do go over some of the forensic evidence and explore the reasons why people haven't accepted his death as a suicide, to me, it is so compelling.
The troubled state of his mind is so compelling.
The evidence is so extensive.
It, to me, defies probability.
that he wouldn't have killed himself and that somebody else might have killed him and he just happened to be also severely depressed at the same time.
I don't think life works that way.
But again, I think what's significant to me, and again, I leave this to readers to interpret, I don't emphasize it, is that the belief in the murder theory and the conspiracy theories involving Vince Foster's death predictably grew out of the climate of mystery that the White House itself created around it.
The White House reaction to Vince Foster's death was to say, we have got to freeze this, but there can't be any speculation about it.
We don't want people finding out that he was depressed.
We don't want people finding out why he was depressed, because they were fearful of the embarrassment that that might then lead.
But in a vacuum like that, wild theories are going to take root and grow.
When people are not told what happened, they start speculating.
I was very struck at how the day after his death,
The president, in a speech to the White House staff, quickly glossed over the loss of a close colleague and friend, somebody who'd grown up with in Hobart, Arkansas, and focused very much on, don't speculate about this, we'll never know why he took his life, don't talk among yourselves about it, and for God's sake, don't talk to anyone outside of the White House.
It was this containment that became the overarching theme.
The foster family was enlisted in this.
One of the criticisms of the Clintons is that they're lawyers.
They have this lawyerly attitude, which really screws them up all the time.
It's obfuscated.
That seems to be the prime imperative.
Well, you see that in repeated instances in this story.
It's overwhelming.
I'm an old public affairs officer in the service, and one of the first things you learn is,
If you handle it properly, deal with it, admit you've probably made your mistakes, you know, and try and control the damage.
And I wonder, had they dealt with this openly at the beginning?
Oh, we wouldn't be reading about this now.
And again, the reason I start with the death of Vince Foster is that is the pivotal event in this entire story.
Before that, Whitewater was dead.
It was over.
Nobody was talking about Whitewater.
Nobody cared about Whitewater.
It never would have resurfaced if Vince Foster hadn't died and then if those Whitewater files hadn't been taken out of his office.
That's what brought this story back to life.
None of this would have happened.
And again, if you're going to deny that Vince Foster was depressed before his death,
then what are people going to conclude?
They're not going to believe suicide.
They're going to say, well, he must have been killed.
It's the only alternative, isn't it?
It is the only alternative.
And I think it was so short-sighted on the part of the White House not to recognize it was in their interest to be open and to help people understand why, however painful it might have been to have to revisit those events, it was better let the truth come out.
I don't even know if they had to do it in that context or the context of the suicide.
They could have done it.
I mean, that wouldn't have helped them, I think, to say, oh,
He was depressed.
That's a lose-lose situation there, too.
I don't know.
Well, they don't have to reach that conclusion, but they could have been, I think particularly, they could have been more open about letting people understand that he was depressed and that there were reasons for his depression.
Some of them possibly embarrassing to the White House, but you know, so something's embarrassing occasionally.
Again, I think the public can...
accept people as human beings with their inevitable flaws.
You don't have to be perfect.
Anything here that you think you are particularly proud of?
I mean, material that you feel you're recording for the first time?
Well, I have been somewhat sensitive to the kind of White House spin that there's nothing new in the book because I think there's something new on almost every page.
And I think that the reporters who have been most immersed in this story have recognized, have told me that they've been astounded by the new material.
And considering that the National Press Corps combed over this story, I don't mean to boast, but combed over Arkansas and combed over this story and essentially didn't come up with anything, and there's so much new in the book.
I mean, the whole story of this investment from, you know,
of Hillary's direct involvement and all the material from Susan McDougall, all of that is new.
Susan McDougall had never spoken to anyone about this other than in a very perfunctory way.
I mean, there's an enormous amount of new information in all of that.
There's an enormous amount of new information from inside the White House that has not come out before.
All of the chapters five and six exploring the relationship of the Clintons to the bank
with whom they were negotiating the renewals of the loans.
All of this is new.
Nobody had really looked at Whitewater after 1986 when Madison Guarantee became insolvent.
He was nothing in 1986.
He was governor.
He was governor of Arkansas.
I didn't know who he was in 1986.
So I think it's been extremely unfair.
And for the people
daily times reviewer to say that it was recycled material from jeff girth of the new york times jeff girth who is a character in the book is the first to acknowledge that there's a tremendous amount of new material in this book um so i thought that was just factually incorrect the other criticism i've been a little sensitive to is that it uses a narrative style um that doesn't attribute every um every quote in the book but in the notes
And if you read the notes, you'll see this.
I very meticulously explained that every quote comes from the speaker or someone heard the remark, in which case the comment was repeated to the speaker for correction of comment.
I'd do the same things in my own book.
All I would be doing is adding every time that attribution, which would make the book 20 or 30 percent longer than a long book already is.
I don't think readers of a book want to know how I get the information.
They want to know what is the truth.
If it's an apparatus and you can document it, it seems to me that that's 75 percent.
Right.
And I'm very proud of the fact that not one character in this book has come forward to say there's anything inaccurate or unfair in their treatment.
Have you read the novel, The Primary Colors?
No, I haven't read it yet.
Well, many people have told me that it's a wonderful compliment to...
And then I'll be surprised at how accurate it is in comparison to the real characters that I've... I just haven't had time reading this issue, so maybe I'll read it next.
Well, I don't know, although I can tell you that people inside the White House I've spoken to believe that Joe Klein, if he did not literally write it, had a hand in it, because too much of the information they have traced, only he could...
He's the common thread in too much of that.
He denied it.
Well, he was present.
He was following him around in the campaign.
In many cases, he was the only reporter who was following Clinton in the primary campaign.
Now, he's denied writing it.
I think more than one person either wrote it or something.
There's some sort of denial.
One thing I haven't seen come up with a joke line.
I've been to you a couple of times at this hotel.
There was a novel that doesn't have to be on tape.
I wish I could share the wire.
I can tell you why I didn't do it.
I was up to my neck.
I wish, you know, you had or I had.
It's one of the million copies of print, too.
Oh, I know.
It's unbelievable.
I mean, I only hope that people who are interested enough in a fictional version will be interested in a real.
It's really interesting.
Excuse me.
Hi.
Yes.
Is your name with Tim Storch, right?
Uh-huh.
There is a... Terrence, no problem.
Can we talk about that?
Yeah, a little more.
Susan apparently emerges as something of a, I wouldn't say a heroine, but without doubt the essential thing.
Susan Thomas is?
No, no.
Oh, Susan McDougal.
Oh, she's certainly a significant character.
Obviously, she's... She seems to be the one you have the most affection for or respect, certainly.
Well, let's put it this way.
I think Susan is a great character.
Now, Susan is a flawed character.
I mean, again, some people have said, well, I know, they make for great reading.
And, you know, Susan, you know, she was a 19-year-old, you know, beauty queen contestant in, you know, Arkadelphia, Arkansas, and she meets Jim McDougall, and pretty soon she's like hobnobbing with the governor, and then she's running a real estate empire, and then she's running an SNL, for God's sake.
Neither she nor Jim had ever even read the regulations governing her.
federally insured institutions.
I think I'm pretty unstinting in showing what a Ponzi scheme the two of them have going at Madison Guarantee, but in the sense that I'm sympathetic that she's a human being with understandable ambitions and emotions, and I think she's at heart a very pretty sympathetic character.
Why do you suppose she agreed to cooperate with you?
I don't know.
It wasn't easy.
You know, people act like, you know, to get somebody to talk to you, just like call them up and suddenly they just feel their guts.
I had to make two trips to California.
The first time, you know, I went all the way out to California spending my own money and she didn't, she wasn't there.
I mean, I thought we had an agreement and it wasn't that we had a specific time.
She said, well, call me when you get out there.
I'll talk to you, whatever.
I said, now I'm coming out, you know, I'm coming.
And then, and then,
She never responded once I got there.
And then I had to go back and risk again the possibility that it wouldn't even happen before she finally did totally talk on the phone.
And, you know, I don't know why people ultimately decide to talk.
I hope it's because, one, they want to get the truth out.
And secondly, you know, I guess I hope they think that I'll deal with it fairly.
Well, do they feel they have belonged to other clients?
It's a complicated situation.
Susan would never have told the Whitewater story the way Jim did.
Jim is the one who spilled the beans.
You see this unfold.
He was bitter and hurt.
He felt he'd been manipulated and used by Clinton and dropped.
Which, by the way, is a common theme that runs through many people who have dealt with them.
And here he subsidized him in Whitewater.
Here he helped him in his political career.
When Jim McDougall was in trouble, the Clintons were not there for him.
He never got anything in return.
That's one of the ironies, frankly, of this story.
Everybody thinks that McDougall subsidized the Clintons, and then Clinton turned around and did some favor for him in return.
What McDougall was upset about is that he never got anything, and not some improper state favor for his regulated SNL, but not even so much as moral support when he fell on hard times and then was indicted for bank fraud.
He was angry.
Clinton had called his mother, MacDougall's mother, when she was very ill and dying, and said that to make her feel better that he was going to hire Jim MacDougall, get him the job again.
And then he never followed through on that.
And that graded on MacDougall.
And to this day, MacDougall gets worked up when he talks about that.
Because every day his mother would call him and say, has Bill called you yet?
And he'd have to say, no.
It was a daily humiliation.
It was like a water torture.
Again, so typical of some of the things you hear, you know, Clinton told McDougal's mother what she wanted to hear and then didn't follow through on it.
You know, how bad is that?
Well, it's no crime, you know, and yet it embraced McDougal, and that's why he told the Whitewater story.
Susan would never have done that.
But once her husband, her former husband, did it, she stood by him, and she wanted to see the truth that came out.
The Clintons then immediately reacted in a way that wasn't truthful, which upset both McDougals.
An irony, though, is that to this day, the McDougals consider themselves supporters of the Clintons.
They've voted for the Clintons.
They've supported them.
They haven't gone to the Independent Council trying to cut a deal for themselves by cooperating against the Clintons.
I think they've behaved in many ways quite honorably under these difficult circumstances.
Was there ever a point, and I think you give a timeline in the book, when you were approached, when you
You had your first discussions, and when you decided to undertake the project, was there a point at which you thought, hey, this isn't going where I think it ought to go.
Maybe I'll can it.
We've all abandoned stories at one point or another.
Not that it's not there, it's just that we can't get it.
Did you ever feel that way?
I didn't really.
I mean, I realized at points this was turning to something quite different from what I had expected, and there were a few times when I wondered, well, am I going to be able to get enough material to really bring this story to life the way I want to?
But no, because I always thought it was, what appealed to me about the story was not just the fact that the Clintons were cooperating, and I thought giving me this kind of historic chance to provide this really immediate portrait of a
sitting president and first lady in something of a crisis situation.
But the characters in the story, I always thought the McDougals were fascinating.
The Clintons themselves are obviously fascinating.
And there were so many questions.
I teach a feature writing course at Columbia, and I always say the best stories start out with a good question.
Don't go to your editors and say, I want to write a story about toxic waste.
Say you want to answer a question that is interesting to you and that you think will be interesting to readers and that you don't know the answer yet, but you hope you'll find it.
And there are so many unanswered questions here.
What really had happened to Vince Foster?
A great mystery that was inspiring a national debate that nobody was really focusing on factually.
All they were doing was picking whatever ideological theory they wanted to.
Why was whitewater still a problem?
What were those files in Vince Fox's office, and why were they taken out when they were?
What was going on here?
There were a lot of questions in my mind, and I figured if there's a question, then there's an answer somewhere.
One of the problems in writing a book, of course, that is subject to the headlines changing on a daily basis, and I think you actually bring it right up to
January or February.
Yeah, it was in January.
I provided a little sketch of what was going on.
And you must be saying, Jesus, what's going to happen here before the book comes out of it?
Tell me a little bit about that risk that you run.
Well, it was something of a risk, except from a literary perspective, this story ends in March of 94, essentially the time I started working on it.
So there was a literary closure to the story.
I mean, at this point, March of 94, the Clintons were pretty much locked into the line of defense that they had adopted.
It does not have an ending in the sense that we yet know the outcome of the current investigations.
That is open-ended.
That could be the subject of either more stories or God knows a sequel.
But in terms of what happened then and how they dealt with it while occupying the White House,
All the elements of the story were in place in March of 1994.
So I felt any, the things I allude to in the foreword are investigative developments that have current interest, but they all shed light on events that happened in the time frame of my narrative.
I suppose I realized there was a risk that eventually the Independent Council will come out with a report which adds new information to the time frame that I cover.
And I just figure that's a risk I can live with.
I think, you know, people have to understand I'm one person.
A book that reflects the work that was done in a certain period of time.
Yeah, exactly.
I did the best I could, and I'm confident I didn't cut corners.
I hired two researchers to work on this.
I hired a full-time fact-checker.
I did everything I knew to be fair, and I used every investigative technique that I knew of within the time allotted.
And, you know, I think all you can do is do the best you can, and then you can live with yourself.
We say you haven't been a political reporter in your background, but how did your actual journalist's background?
I mean, I think the answer is obviously you can articulate a part of your assistant in this particular book.
Well, my last book was about Den of Thieves, and that involved, you know, much more sophisticated and big-dollar machinations on Wall Street and in the financial markets.
But I do have a background, and I was an editor at the Wall Street Journal, a reporter at the Wall Street Journal.
I've reported a lot in financial stories.
So the whole banking side of this was not particularly intimidating.
As financial stories go, this one is really quite simple.
And it's not very confusing once you get it into chronological order.
Anybody who's taken out a bank mortgage, I think, can understand it.
But I was familiar with those kinds of institutions.
And I also have a legal background.
So I'm pretty familiar with the course of legal investigations, the kinds of problems that surface in cases that involve obstruction of justice.
So I felt pretty comfortable delving into a lot of those areas as well.
So in that sense, it was sort of right up my alley.
The political overlay to me was not terribly significant.
I mean, I did get into it to some extent, but this is not so much a book about politics, although it is
Well, I guess I have to say it is ultimately a book about politics.
Well, Tom Collins called it one of the great political books of the season.
Well, I was thrilled that he said so.
I think it's not a book about politics in that it spends most of its time delving into political strategy of the participants.
I think it simply is saying how people behave and react in times difficult circumstances.
as a way of illuminating a sort of broader political culture.
Has the Washington Post reviewed it yet?
Yes.
How did they have it made those?
It was good.
Being cognizant of their political attitudes.
It was the first review that came out.
It was a week ago, Sunday.
It was by Jonathan Yardley, who's their chief book critic.
As I remember it, it was kind of mostly just saying what was in the book.
It didn't dwell too much on it as a book, per se.
I think the Washington Post is a little defensive about somebody coming from New York and writing a political book.
But it was a very nice review.
Especially a political outsider.
They have political reporters in New York as well, but politics is not really your beat, so to speak.
No.
The only review that got my...
you know, hackles up a little bit was the Daily Times, because I thought that the point that it was recycled material infuriated me.
That, to me, was just factually wrong.
And the rest of it, you know, she's entitled to her opinion, but it seems so kind of missing the point, you know, that was sort of disheartening.
So are you still with the journal?
Are you full-time?
No, I'm pretty much freelance now.
I have an office at Smart Money Magazine, which is a past journal and enterprise where I contribute, and I write articles for The New Yorker.
Wonderful.
I'll go back to that once I get a breather.
So the idea of another book will just have to present itself, right?
Well, I'm not saying it'll present itself the way this one did.
I can't think of another big project where somebody just came into your office.
You don't have one.
No, I don't have one right in mind at the moment.
A good book idea takes some time to gel in mind.
You know what, I think we've got, we'll give you a little time.
Okay, thank you.
We'll get 45 minutes here.